(gentle music)
One thing you're gonna hear thrown around
a lot when you're getting into JavaScript
is people are gonna say JavaScript functions
are first class citizens,
first class citizens, what does that even mean?
Well, what it means is that JavaScript functions
are values in themselves
they can be stored in variables
and they can be passed in to other functions,
so what is it, what's the value in JavaScript?
Well, a value in JavaScript is like age equals a hundred.
Right, the value is a hundred,
or const cool is equal to true.
These are values that are numbers, or objects, or strings,
or booleans, and the cool thing about JavaScript
is that functions can be passed into other functions,
functions can be stored in variables,
functions can be handled and moved around
just like any other piece of data in JavaScript.
And that's not true for every other language
and it's pretty neat and it actually allows us
to do some pretty nifty things with JavaScript.
So we're gonna delve into passing functions
into other functions in the future.
But for now, let's talk about
the ability to put functions into variables.
And this video is gonna dive into all the different ways
to declare function, so let's talk about that now,
let's make a new file in our custom functions folder
we'll make a new file,
let's call it ways to make a function.js
and let's console log, it works.
And let's go back into that index, the HTML
and we'll just change the cf to ways to make a function.js
open that sucker up in the browser,
and we'll check that it works, it does work good.
The one way that we know how to declare function right now
is with the function keyword, so we say function doctorize
and we take in a first name and we'll return Dr. firstName.
Now let's see how we can actually declare that
in other ways, we'll comment that out
'cause we're gonna be redoing this function
in all of the different ways.
The next way is what's called an anonymous function,
a function without a name is called an anonymous function.
So if we actually just take this function right here
and duplicate it.
So I might go ahead and remove the name
from this function doctorize
that actually gives us what's called an anonymous function,
a function without a name is an anonymous function.
And it's actually not valid JavaScript in this case
right here it says function statements
require a function name,
however they are valid in very many other use cases
which we're gonna into this video
specifically using them as callbacks we'll learn about that,
as well as using them in an iffy
and in immediately invoked function expression
but you'll see right here,
just defining this function statement here
it's actually not valid JavaScript.
So like, why would you ever want that?
Well, that gets us to the next sort of way
to define a function, maybe let's just say,
a non function here, and we'll comment that out.
Let's duplicate it and then comment out the first one
and then the next one is called a function expression.
And a function expression is where you store a function
as a value in a variable.
So what we're gonna do here is we're gonna say
const doctorize and what we just did there
is we took an anonymous function,
and we stuck it into a variable
and now if we refresh our page here,
you'll see that we actually have doctorize available to us
and it will run just like we normally were Dr. Wes.
So that's pretty cool and this is what people mean
when they say functions are first class citizens,
because what we're doing here
is we're actually just creating a variable
like we're gonna store a number or a string or a boolean
except we're storing as a value the actual function name.
Now, you may sometimes run across developers
and that they'll say don't use that it gives you bad errors
and what they mean by that is if you have like an error
inside of here and you say like, doesn't exist,
you try to call a function that doesn't exist
and we go ahead and try to run that
what you see is uncaught reference error
doesn't exist is not defined
and those errors used to be really tricky
to be able to find out where did this specifically happen,
obviously it tells you the line number which is helpful,
but it actually used to just tell you that
this happened in an anonymous function,
and you'd be sitting there saying,
thanks for the good info as to to what happened here
I have no idea where this function is actually going array
but in our case it does now tell you
that it happened inside of doctorize on line 12.
So while this function is technically an anonymous function,
a function without a name,
the browsers will now sort of infer the name of the function
from the variable name and sort of use that
in the errors here as the function name.
So it still tells you it's an anonymous function
but it also is gonna tell you that it happened
in our doctorize function.
So this is a way to define a function inside of a variable
that's called a function expression.
So what's the difference between doing this,
a regular function declaration
and this our function expression declaration?
Why would you wanna do one over the other?
Well, there are only one real difference
past this error handling
which isn't really much of an issue anymore,
the other difference is how they operate in something called
hoisting and not hosting, hoisting
we're gonna cover this topic in a future video
but essentially, I'll just show you real quick
don't tell anybody I'm showing you this here.
So let's say we've got this function doctorize2
and we have regular doctorize.
If I go up to the top here and I run these things
before doctorize and I say doctorize Wes,
do you think that this is gonna run?
Like if you run a function before you define it,
does it work?
No, let's see, Uncaught ReferenceEror
Cannot Access doctorize before initialization, okay,
what about doctorize two, is that gonna work?
Seems to, I guess we have to console that log, the output
to see if it will work, it does work.
So doctorize2 works, doctorize gives me an error, why?
Well, that's because even though
these are the exact same functions that we've created here
because you define a regular function
with a function keyword, and this one with a variable
functions that are declared with the function keyword
are called hoisted,
meaning that JavaScript takes all functions
and hoists them up, up, up and it says
okay, you're a function,
I'm going to actually put you at the top of the file,
so that anywhere that you call the function,
it will then be available to you.
JavaScript does not hoist variable functions,
it does hoist the declaration of the variable,
we'll go into that, that's a little bit in the winds,
but it does not do it with this type of function.
So why is that useful?
Very rarely do I actually ever use
I'm gonna go as far to say as I never use that
in my entire career, there are some like little use cases
that some developers like to have.
I'll go into that at a later point
but that's really I have to know
hoisting is more of one of these sort of like
interview questions that someone's gonna sling at you
and essentially means that JavaScript will take functions
and bring them up to the before the call log
and you can technically run a function before it's defined
with that ability, so that's how it works.
So let's go back to what we have here,
I'm gonna bring this back to just regular doctorize
so that is the function expression
it's a way that we can,
that's the one we wanna keep not this one
this is the function expression
that you can put a function in a variable.
So let's go on to the next type
which is called an arrow function,
now arrow functions themselves have like three or four
different like nuanced ways to declare them
so let's sit tight and figure out how we can do them.
Arrow functions are an addition to JavaScript
in the last couple years, they offer a couple things,
first, they offer a concise syntax and they're shorter.
So if you got a lot of functions, or you have these little
what are called callback functions, we'll go into that
it's often handy to just write a quick little
one liner function, so that's one benefit.
The other benefit that they have
is that they don't have their own scope
in referred to this keyword.
So we haven't gone into this keyword yet
but we will in a future video and I'll show you exactly
the difference between a regular function like this
or even this, and a arrow function
and how it scopes the keyword this.
First thing, arrow functions are anonymous function
so what it means is that there's no way to declare
an arrow function like this,
you always have to declare it and stick it into a variable
if that's what you need.
So to illustrate this,
let's start writing a regular function
so we'll have a function and let's call it inchToCM.
So I know a lot of y'all are from America
and you you give inches
so what we wanna do is have a function that takes in inches
and it's going to return centimeters.
So we'll say const cn is equal to the inches times 2.54
and then we will return this cn from this function.
Now let's go ahead and try it out inchesToCM
So if I've got three inches, we have 7.62 centimeters
okay, that works that's our regular old function
that we have, now this is pretty simple,
it's a pretty simple function
but it still takes up like 1, 2, 3, 4 lines of code
and you might think like, all we're doing here
is multiplying a number by 2.54
why do we need such a big function in order to do that,
so we can make that a little bit shorter
by instead of like creating a variable
and then just returning that variable,
you can actually just return the calculation itself.
So you see, actually look what happened there
my editor made that sort of a darker shade
of what it used to be and if you hover over top of it
it says unreachable code detected
that's because anytime like we talked about
anytime you have a return inside of a function
anything after that is unreachable, it will never run
'cause as soon as a return happens in a function,
that function is complete, it's done.
It's done running and any code below that will never run
so obviously we'll get rid of that.
So that's one way to make our function a little bit smaller,
where instead of making a variable
and then return that variable,
we can just return the output of this multiplication
in one single line.
Good, now we can actually convert that
to an anonymous function in preparation for the arrow
so instead of making a function with inchToCM,
let's make it an anonymous function
and we'll say const inchToCM equals a function
that takes in inches, so that's exactly the same
right, and let's just make sure it still works.
Good it still works exactly the same way
we've just made it an anonymous function
and stored it in a variable.
Now what we can do is we wanna convert this sucker
over to what's called an arrow function
with a little bit more concise syntax.
Now, there's a couple of different ways
we can make a arrow function
I'm gonna step you through that right now.
So the first thing is, instead of writing this,
this is a big word,
instead of writing this big word called function
we'll delete it,
and we'll go to the right of the parentheses
and give ourselves what's called a fat arrow.
So in programming we call this a fat arrow,
meaning that this is a skinny arrow, this is a fat arrow.
So the fat one is with the equals and an angle bracket.
So you have that there, I haven't saved yet
I'm worried that my prettier
is actually going to remove this parentheses if I save,
you see it just put it on one line.
I'm trying to teach you the steps here
but prettier is just doing all the steps for me.
So I'm going to disable that, eslint-disabled
disable, there we go, okay I just disabled eslint there
so it wouldn't actually fix it for me
so I'm trying to teach you to you.
So there's the first thing that we did
is we took the word function and we removed it
and then we went to the other side of the parentheses
and put an arrow there.
So the space could be like that if you like
and you see it still works,
but my prettier will put spaces in between
just for readability, okay that works, is it still work?
Good, still works just as as planned
so it's a little bit more concise.
The next thing we can do is what's called an implicit return
typing the return key word right here
that's an explicit return
meaning that we explicitly return this value here
and an implicit return is returning it
without actually having to type this keyword
right, remember I said arrow functions
are all about being concise
so they allow us to actually return a value
without having to type the keyword return.
So the way that that works
is let's first put it all on one line
functions can go on one line,
just usually don't just forget readability sake
so let's put this all on one line there
good, and then what we wanna do
to get rid of the explicit return
is first you delete the curly brackets,
you put it all on one line, delete the curly brackets,
and then delete the key word return,
and obviously, there's one more semicolon there
we'll get rid of that as well.
So what we just did there
is we made a function called inchToCM,
we set it to this is the arrow function still right here,
it takes in one argument which is called inches,
and then it will return and the way we can tell this
is an implicit return is because first it's all on one line,
and second, there's no return keyword,
and third, there's no curly brackets.
So inches times let's see if it still works,
still works just great for us.
So what we did there is we remove the function block
because often your functions are just gonna be quick little
one liners, that it's unnecessary to have the block,
you totally can have the block
look, I could bring this back here
and I could give myself the block curly brackets
and I could still make my cm
and then I could return the CM value,
but then we're back to four lines again.
So what's easier is we can first just return inches to cm
get rid of that, then we can put it all on one line,
then we can get rid of the block of the function
so remove that, remove that
and then finally we can get rid of that return function
that we have there.
Finally, and this is more of a stylistic choice,
but if there is only ever one argument for your function,
you can actually get rid of the these parentheses as well.
Now this is a bit of a thing to look at
so let's just see if that works here, yeah, still works.
Now what happened here is that this is still
your arrow function here
but we've taken the parentheses off
because if there is only ever one argument
to your arrow function,
you can actually remove them no problem.
So let's do another example
'cause I know that was a whole bunch
and often people can sort of look look at arrow function
and say like, "Bruh, what's going on there,"
there's a whole lot that's unsaid
and I prefer the actual functions
that are a little bit more explicit.
So let's make a function called add
and we'll set it to a and b,
and we'll set b to three by default,
and we'll say const total is equal to a plus b
and we will return the total.
So what's going on here
we declared a regular function called add,
which takes in two parameters, first one a, second one b,
we've set it to a default value of three in b
then we make a temporary variable called total
add the two together
and then return the total at the end of the day.
So pause, try to convert the sucker
to an arrow function yourself,
and then come back and it will do together.
Welcome back, hopefully you had a great time.
So let's first we'll see if it works.
Add one and two, it works beautiful
does it work if we just pass one,
you see that, its like dev tools here
is actually giving you this little annotation here.
That little question mark in front of b
is telling us that the b argument is optional.
That's pretty cool actually, why is it optional?
Because if we don't pass it, it will fall back to three.
So if I just add one, it returns four
because b falls back to three.
So let's convert this, maybe I'll just duplicate it
and then I'll comment this one out
just so we don't have duplicate.
So first thing we wanna do
is let's stick it in a variable called add
and we'll remove the name of the function
let's see if it still work, good.
Next thing we'll do is we'll convert it to an arrow
so get rid of the function keyword
and we'll go to the right of the parentheses
and give ourselves a fat arrow.
Next thing we'll do is we'll just return a and b
and get rid of that total variable,
and the next thing we'll do is we'll put it on its own line,
get rid of that parenthesis is not necessarily in that case,
then we can get rid of the function block
in the return keyword
and we have a very short arrow function.
The one thing you'll notice that we didn't do in this case
is we did not get rid of the parentheses
because look at that, is that gonna work
it Malformed arrow function and the parameter list
so that's not allowed and the reason why is that
if you have more than one parameter in your function,
then you must must give yourself the parentheses.
So that is arrow functions
there's a couple other sort of gotchas
that we need to know about
let's go over them right now.
There is returning an object
so let's make a function called makeABaby
and we will take in the baby's first name and last name
and in here we'll say const baby is equal to
and we'll have an object
and we'll say the baby's first name
or we'll just say the baby's name is equal to first, last,
and the baby's age is zero, they were just born.
So that's our makeABaby function, let's see if it works.
MakeABaby, kit, bos, I just have my baby a couple days ago.
Returns undefined oh, we didn't return the baby
always return your baby folks.
Aah, beautiful okay, we pass in tWo arguments
it returns the name and the age of zero.
Good, so how would we convert this sucker to an object?
Well, let's first will duplicate that.
Comment this one out so we can reference
what it used to look like.
First thing we'll do is we'll stick it in a variable const
makeABaby, should we make sure it still works, good.
Next thing we're gonna do is convert it to an arrow.
Good, and by the way if your function
needs to do some stuff inside of the block,
you can leave it at this
this is a perfectly valid arrow function
if the only thing you're doing is just using the arrow,
both for the ability to type less
as well as some of the benefits of not scoping this
we'll go into at a later video, this is totally valid
you can absolutely just stop here
and that's a great function
you should be proud of that function,
however, we can take it a little bit further.
So we could instead of making a baby variable
and returning the baby,
we could just return this right here.
Good, so now the question is like,
how would I do the implicit return?
So we can put this on its own line
objects can be put on one line no problem,
that's a pretty common thing to do
if you just wanna make it a quick little one liner
that's still works, but how would I return it?
Let's try, let's get rid of the return.
Oh, wait, let put it all on one line at first.
All right, this is getting a bit hairy
what's going on here?
So then if we wanna make it in implicit return,
we get rid of the curly bracket and the return
and get rid of that
but what's happened here, Unexpected token
what's happening here is that it thinks
that the curly bracket from making the baby object
is actually the curly bracket
from the block of the function, right?
'Cause curly brackets in JavaScript can be creation
of an object, or they can be a block of code
which in this case, it's the block of the function,
the body of the function.
So how do you implicitly return an object
when it gets confused about what the curly bracket
actually is, and if that's the case
if you implicitly returning an object
you just pop a set of parentheses around the thing
that you are returning and that will sort of contain it
inside of a parenthese and it will won't think
that it's actually the blocker of the function,
then we can put a semicolon on the end there
for good measure, and the baby still works.
So is that a better function
than the one we built right here?
I don't think so probably not,
you're not really having all that much benefit,
I think that this is probably a little bit more readable.
So there's sort of this when arrow functions came out
and people sort of thought
everything must be an arrow function
'cause it's new and it's better
and of course, it has a couple of benefits
but there's absolutely nothing wrong
with doing a regular function
especially you wanna think about your future self,
you come back in six months, and you want to know
what does makeABaby do, like what's a little bit easier
this is probably a bit easier to actually to read
than something like this.
So don't always just go for an arrow function by default
and I think it will become a little bit more clear
as to when you should reach for an arrow function
in the future once especially once we get into argument
with arrays and doing map and reduce and filter
and things like that.
So that is arrow functions, we'll be going over those
we'll be using them a whole lot more
over the next little bit,
lemme get rid of this makeABaby right here.
The next sort of like way to define a function
is called an IIFE, I-I-F-E
and this is an immediately invoked function expression
this is an I-I-F-E
and the way that it works is if we create a function
that isn't woow SVG component transfer function element,
function and let's just return you are cool.
And let's just console log 'Running the Anon function.'
So this is just a regular anonymous function
if we try to refresh it, it doesn't work
because it's not allowed.
In we talked about you can put these in a variable
if you want, right, you can just stick these in a variable
and everything will be okay.
But another way to sort of run these functions
is what's called an immediately invoked functional
expression, so what you can do
is you can wrap this function in a parentheses
and what that will do is parentheses always run first
in JavaScript and what this will do
is it will return a function value
and then you can immediately run that function
by putting parentheses on the end.
Wow, and if we refresh the page
you'll see that our function expression
was immediately invoked, it was immediately run.
So immediately run function expression
would be another way to say it.
So like, what's the benefit of doing something like that?
Well, it used to be very popular before we had modules
and before we actually had what's called block scope,
because when we get into scoping,
you're gonna realize that a function declares its own scope,
and it's often handy to even declare functions
inside of this thing
and it will sort of provide us our own little sheltered
space where variables can't leak inside,
and something like that.
So I'm not gonna go super deep into that just yet
because I think it's a bit more of an advanced topic
and we will be using it
but for now we're going to just know
that this is the immediately invoked function expression.
Last thing is like, what if this function took an age,
You are cool and age, age to the back text.
How would that work?
Well, if you want to pass an age, you pass it like that.
So this will probably look a little bit funky to you
and again, it's probably not something
you're gonna be using all that often
but it does come up every now and then
where I need to create what's called a closure
we've got a video coming up on those,
I need to have my own scope so stay tuned for that.
Next type of function that we have is called a,
let's get rid of this console log.
The next one we have is called methods,
methods I've been sort of like,
just like saying methods and functions are the same thing
and we have an entire video on creating your own methods
coming out, but for now we can we can understand
what a method is.
So a method is simply a function
that lives inside of an object.
So if we take a look at our function here,
which is console.log, I say hey,
I've been telling you that console log is a function now
I've been lying to you, log is actually the function
that lives inside of console, console is actually an object
if you just type in console and you open it up
you'll see that there's there's all kinds of stuff in here
right, if you hover over where's log, let's look for it
here we go log, you hover over top of it,
you see there's a little f there
and that means that it's actually a function
so log is the function, info is the function,
console.count is the function
and console is an object and that we use a special word
to describe functions that live inside of an object
and we call those methods.
So we can actually do something like this where we say
const wes is equal to an object
and we can say the name is Wes bus
and we'll saHi, is equal to a function.
And inside of that we can say console.log ('Hey Wes')
or we could return 'Hey Wes' let's try it.
We got Wes and Wes.sayHi is a method
so that's one way to declare a method
you just create a property on your object
and you set it to a function.
These functions can also have names
sometimes you'll see this
It doesn't make a whole lot of sense to me to do this
but it's technically allowed,
the property or the variable is called sayHi
and the function name is also called sayHi
it's not necessary to do that anymore
because the browsers will infer the name of the function
from the property name, just like when we stuck
a function into a variable, there's no need to name it
because it will infer the name of the function
from the prop, the variable that it's in.
So that's one way to define a function.
There is also a new shorthand method
so we'll just say, we'll put a comment here, method
and then we'll just say, short hand method,
we'll make one called yellHi and from that
we'll just console log('HEY WESSSSS')
and you'll see what I did there
is instead of saying yellHi:function
which will work let's try it wes.YellHi,
we can actually get rid of the function keyword
and get rid of the parenthese and what this will do
is that it will make a property called yellHi
set to a function called yellHi.
So this is just a shorthand way to write methods
inside of an object where you just write yelHi parentheses
and then the function block, again it's exact same thing
as doing this yellHi is equal to a function
that is console log in WESSS, something I goofed up there,
what did I, i spelt function wrong, there we go.
So again, we'll bring that back
there also is another way of an arrow function
where we could say wisperHi and that will be equal to
an arrow function, we just console log
('hii wesss I'm a mouse')
do mouses whisper, I think they do.
So that's just another way,
this is an arrow function that takes no arguments.
In this case you could take in somebody's name
or something like that if you want and that shows us
so these are three different ways to do methods,
I would say that this going to be the most common way,
the only reason you would do an arrow function
is because you don't wanna access this.
We're gonna go into that once we hit object,
but I'll show you real quick in here is,
if you were to console log this,
the keyword this inside of a method,
if I were to console log wes.sayHi
you'll see that line 50 I console log this
so that's this one right here
and you open it up, this is gonna be equal to the object
that it was called against.
And that's kinda cool because you could actually just do
something like this console log('Hey $')
again, we're getting a little ahead of ourselves
but I just wanna show you real quick.
So if I say, sayHi, says Hey Wes Bos,
if I changed my name to Westopher
you see that it automatically just pulls it
from the actual object itself
the thing about that will work in this one as well,
it will not work in this one because arrow functions
do not have a scope of this or sorry,
they take the parent scope of this.
So again, a little bit ahead will go much more into that
in the future, that is what methods are.
The final thing I wanna talk to you about functions
and ways to declare them, they are called callback function
so let's make a callback functions.
So callback function is just a regular function
but we sort of use that name for something
that will happen when something is done
and the easiest way to define a callback function
is either when somebody clicks something, run this
or when this amount of time has passed, run this.
So let's look at both of those examples right now.
So first one, let's do a quick call back.
We'll go into our index HTML
and we'll give ourselves a button and say click me
and give that a class of click me,
then I'll go down here and we'll select that element
will go much more into the dom
but in order to select the element will say const button
is equal to document.query selector say .clickMe
and console log the button.
Let's see if that works, good
we've got this button showing up
then we're going to listen for a click on that button,
say button.addEvent listener and when that click happens,
we pass it reference to any function that we want to to run.
So let's say wes.yellHi
now every time you click it, it just says, HEY WESSSS right.
So what's happening here, is this is an event listener
that we're listening for a click on and the callback
is sort of a function that we give it access to
you'll notice that we're not running in here
we're just saying, here's the function,
the browser, could you be a dear and call that function
when somebody clicks that button
and that is what is referred to as a callback function.
Now, callback functions can be declared outside
of the handler, so I'll make a function called handleClick
and you can call that anything you want and console log
Great Clicking!! in here we'll say handleClick.
So what we've done here is we've defined a function called
handleclick, and then we said when somebody clicks it,
here's the function that you should run browser
and click it says great clicking.
The other option and this is probably about half as common
I'd say myself half the time I do it like this
where I defined the function outside
and then I just pass in reference to the function.
The other way to do it is you can actually just pass it
in anonymous function in here
so we can actually do this, we just say function
and inside of that, we can console log ('Nice Job!!!')
And it works just fine, so what we've done here
is we've just passed it and anonymous function
as a value directly and the browser will know
to call this function itself.
So there's some upsides and downsides to doing it this way,
we'll get into it and we hit event listeners but just know
that this is what's referred to as a callback function,
a function that gets passed into another function
and then it is called by the browser
at a later point in time.
And the other example that we have there
is a like a timer callback.
So, in the browser we have a couple ways to do timers
and we'll look at all of those in the future
and probably the simplest one is with a set timeout
and a set timeout takes two things.
First, it takes a function to call
that you want to run after a certain amount of time.
So we could say, wes.yellHi and then second,
it asks for a duration in milliseconds
so after how long should I run this.
So let's do 1000 that's one second later.
Now we run this page and after one second,
it will run HEY WESSSS.
So that's cool but you can also like we've done before
is you can pass it an anonymous function.
And in here, console log done, time to eat
Time to eat, so this is where its referred to
as a callback function.
You can pass those as arrow functions as well
that will work just exactly the same beautiful
in any of the other ways that we've looked at it.
So callback functions,
we're gonna use this a lot in our examples.
So that is all the different ways
that you can declare a function.
We got a couple more things to learn
before we can get into writing
a whole bunch of cool examples.